+++
title = "How Org-mode has significantly uplifted my life"
date = "2017-04-02"
tags = [ "org-mode", "Emacs", "writing", "productivity" ]
categories = [ "Emacs", "org-mode" ]
type = "post"
+++


# Table of Contents

1.  [Introduction](#org7c1e287)
2.  [Needs versus software's development](#org733cac0)
3.  [Everybody's needs are unique](#orgdc2debe)
4.  [Concluding points](#org1a59e54)


<a id="org7c1e287"></a>

# Introduction

There are several videos, articles, complex manuals, customisable code snippets, all borne on a long, rich history behind emacs, and Orgmode. I doubt I can add much to those articles, except to share my viewpoint on why I think org mode should be learnt and utilised by more people. It will probably also cover why it won't be utilised by those people.

From a fundamental perspective, I have found that it is simply therapeutic to put down the thoughts that occur to me. In line with the advice given by guys like James Altucher, I wanted to write down atleast 10 ideas a day, create a blog with regular posts, find a way to record the nuggets of wisdom that I come across everyday and a system to manage the tasks I had to do. I Needed a great tool to get working on the above&#x2026;

In my view, Todoist offers the best bang for your buck, especially with it's natural language parsing ability. As many describe, Omnifocus is probably the king of task management tools, though I've never used it. The reason is that Omnifocus is limited to the Apple platform and this is a serious handicap for people (like me) who are forced to use multiple systems and devices distributed between personal and work environmnents. The Todoist experience is more or less seamless across all the platforms, with a great sync feature. I've used Todoist quite extensively via Chrome extensions/add-ins, the stand alone software on Windows and the Mac, and on Android as well as the iphone and religiously managed my tasks with Todoist for over a year.


<a id="org733cac0"></a>

# Needs versus software's development

The real problem will surface when needs evolve at a pace that the software's development cannot keep up with. This is when you wait endlessly for specific features that you believe would make a phenomenal difference to your personal workflow. This may range from a small tweak or bugfix  to a rewiring of the basic behavior of the program itself. Additionally, the propietary format of tasks/notes and entries in Todoist or even Evernote is not very comforting to know. Maintaining a simple text file with lists of work or notes is too simplistic for a complex problem. However, the issue is resolved when the Text file is parsed by a system like Orgmode with in built and novel routines to filter and present the data in the text file in a very useful and customisable format.

A list works when dealing with a bunch of needs&#x2026; Things I'd like from a tool related to task management and organisation: 

1.  Easy Note taking ability - the note need not be assigned to a task.
2.  Quick capturing of links and snippets from websites and emails
3.  Consistent experience across multiple platforms and very fast sync.
4.  Ability to manage personal or work related projects
5.  A date management system with atleast reasonably good understanding of natural language
6.  Refiling tasks/notes very easily across main tasks or categories or projects
7.  Customisable Views of the task summary along with the deadlines
8.  Task and Note search and filtering at every level possible
9.  Ability to easily export notes to multiple formats and write in some form of markup language so as to take care of formatting on the go.
10. Preferably an all-in-one tool for managing notes, all kinds of writing, research, tasks, recurring reminders, maintaining an activity log/journal, project summaries .. etc.
11. Includes 'clocking' abilities for tasks.
12. Fast keyboard based shortcuts to do all that is required.
13. Recording tasks or notes from the phone, while on the go.
14. Should have the lightest footprint possible in terms of time spent on the tool, as well as system resources.

Several of the above points can be done in Todoist and other tools, in one way or the other. However, a holistic consideration of the above points indicate a system that is a cross between Todoist and Evernote, capable of being utilised for a multitude of purposes : a customised GTD workflow plus an organiser for notes or writings. Point no 9, could serve to be a concise but incomplete statement of Orgmode's capabilities, and is a stark reminder of Todoist's specific expertise in only task management. Additionally, the above points can be done in orgmode, *very*, *very* quickly. Evernote has a great system, but is not as fast, because it indexes a huge variety of content, and orgmode is optimised for text. 

An example workflow would be - I could be writing down a summary of a project, when I remember an additional task for another project or want to note down a snippet of generic information. I don't have a photographic memory, and need to dump these tasks or notes - without breaking my on-going workflow, in a place that I can easily look up. Such an activity is not at all streamlined with Todoist, and definitely not so with Evernote. Once you get used to the speed of recording stuff with orgmode, along with the myriad possibilities of auto-save, backups, moving the cursor to the last location you were at, switching to another document/heading at lightning speed and etc - it will be hard to find another system that is truly competitive.

Project management via org-mode can enable you to find information at a speed that is very pleasing. In my job, I have to deal with several customers of different kinds, thoroughly understand their requirements, resolve technical and commercial ambiguities and be able to refer to earlier jobs where something was agreed upon.  There are a bewildering number of aspects to take care of in a project with sporadic infusions of infomation which could be clarifications or even new information altogether. Included in project / productivity /relationship management are several subsets of activities like Minutes of Meetings (MOM's), summaries of travel/visits to the customer, telephonic discussions, indications of future projects as well as generic or specific problems. Using orgmode, I am able to keep a better handle on all these aspects, more efficiently than any other note taking system, including conventional handwritten notes. Some of my thoughts on Handwritten notes are elucidated in the blog post - [To Record or **not** to record &#x2026;](http://shrysr.github.io/2016-04-02-Note-taking-need/#some-musings-on-handwritten-notes) I could even cusutomise an agenda to display date wise entries related to a particular project or/and customer, activated by a few keypresses. It's possible to develop a custom set of :PROPERTIES:, that can serve as an excellent summary for each project.


<a id="orgdc2debe"></a>

# Everybody's needs are unique

Eventually, I guess we all come to accept the fact that each human being is unique. Each one of us have our own ways of thinking,  being and approaching problems. While Todoist worked very well for me - I was still bothered by being constrained by it's proprietary format and the lack of a lifetime membership with a one time payment. Money spent should give me a tool that brings supreme value and satisfaction with it. It was also tiresome to take detailed notes on tasks and rely on a separate Simplenote/Evernote system via Sublime Text for this purpose. It may not be the same viewpoint for you. You may want a great GUI design and app that works well on your phone in addition to other environments. On iOS - I've foun [Drafts](http://agiletortoise.com/drafts/) is a great app for writing fast and appending the notes to an org file, which can be refiled later, using emacs. The only problem I'm yet to resolve is that appending to an org file in dropbox, requires a network/internet connection. There should be a way to deal with situations without handy internet available.

Orgmode is more aligned to people who prefer to get most of their work done on their computers, who are or atleast don't mind being keyboard shortcut freaks and those who would like to take the effort to learn a souped up text editor like emacs that can evolve to cover a lot of needs efficiently. It's not going to work well for people who need a reminder to pop up on their phones, with a fancy GUI and those who expect a software to work extremely well right out of the box. HOwever, this *is* orgmode and emacs&#x2026;. there are ways to sync your iOS / outlook calendar with orgmode's calendar, or with wunderlist or Toodledo. ANything is possible, but it just won't be via some classy GUI&#x2026; 


<a id="org1a59e54"></a>

# Concluding points

While it may seem daunting at first - the feeling of being able to search through existing notes to know whether you have met this particular thought/aspect before, can be extremely valuable and very satisfying. There are people like [Sacha Chua](http://sachachua.com/blog/) who've built complex, efficient, customised workflows through which a great deal of achievement has been made possible via a streamlined tool. As [Cal Newport](http://calnewport.com/) often reiterates in his blog and exploration on productivity - it is important to be able to accurately quantify the time being spent on different things. 

As mentioned earlier, the Organiser tool by itself should have the lightest possible footprint in terms of the time taken to enter in stuff. Certainly, most people spend a lifetime in customising emacs and that may seem contrary to the previous point. However, it is certainly possible to quickly reach a certain point that results in a marked improvement in productivity and workflow. Beyond this, leisure time can always be spent in fine-tuning the basic setup.

The versatility of Orgmode's capabilities and workflow are extremely interesting. The customisation options are literally endless and constrained only by  programming skills, or Googling skills to find the code snippet that can get your work done, not to mention social skills in getting help via online communities. This is actually a lot easier than it sounds. While a bunch of you would call this a weakness, there are a large number of people who see the value in a customised tool which will evolve to facilitate a very fast and efficient workflow. 

Deliberate practise towards improvement is certainly boosted when one is able to work consistently in a environment customised to needs and workflows. Using Orgmode is a firm step in this direction. 

