+++
title = "Code School - free weekend - Python course <2017-08-19 Sat>"
type = "post"
date = "2018-04-07"
tags = [ "python", "programming", "code exploration", "learning notes" ]
topics = [ "" ]

+++


# Level 1 - 1.5


## python variables cannot have a space inbetween or start with digits or special characters.


## pep 8 style underscore seperating words, more pythonic than camelcase


## camelcase is basically a capital letter separating words.


## Math Floor function is used to round down figures

This is a test line

    import math
    num_macaws = 20
    num_students = 3
    macaws_per_student = num_macaws / num_students
    macaws_per_student_rounded= math.ceil(macaws_per_student) 
    print (macaws_per_student_rounded)

    7


# Level 2 , 2.1


## Strings can be enclosed within a single or a double quote. Better to be consistent through the program.


## Strings can be concatenated, and spaces can be included. Hash is used to include comments. Print command can be used to concatenate.

    #This is a comment that is is not interpreted.
    first= 'monty'
    second='python'
    total= first + " " + second
    print (total)
    print (first,"", second)
    #notice how an extra space is added in the 2nd line. This basically means that the space is added automatically. 
    print (first,second,'. This is corrected.')

    monty python
    monty  python
    monty python . This is corrected.


## Double quote and single quote combination can be used for words that have an apostrophe

    print("test")

test

    print("This is Mac's notebook")
    #if i had used a single quote to enclose the string, then the string would have terminated at Mac's. Knowing this is useful with respect to string manipulation. 

    This is Mac's notebook


### Convert a number into a string, use the function str. Remember to concatenate numbers into strings before concatenating

    number = 1
    string = str(number)
    print (type (string))
    print (type (number))

    <class 'str'>
    <class 'int'>


### Test program to explore formatting strings

    movie1 = "Clear and present danger"
    movie2 = "tom dick and harry"
    print ("My favorite movies \n \t", movie1, "\n \t", movie2)

    My favorite movies 
         Clear and present danger 
         tom dick and harry


# Level 2, 2.7


## Strings are actually a list of characters, to be treated as an array or a matrix. Therefore, a string[0], gives me the first character

    string1= 'Ragavan'
    print(string1[0])
    print(string1[4])
    print(string1[3:]) #this is to print a range of the characters

    R
    v
    avan


## Len() - for length of the string. Space is included as a count. This can be used to figure out the middle of the string.

    string1= 'Shreyas Ragavan'
    print (type(len(string1)))
    #note that the space is included as a count

    <class 'int'>


## String Slice formula: variable[start:end+1]

    string1= 'Shreyas Ragavan'
    s2= string1[2:]
    s3=string1[4:6]
    s4=string1[2:5]
    print (s2)
    print (s3)
    print (s4)

    reyas Ragavan
    ya
    rey


## Integer division can be used to round up divisions. Python 2 - single division and integer division are the same thing.

    s1="Ragavan"
    s2="Jayanthi"
    s1_5= len(s1)//2
    s2_5= len(s2)//2
    print (s1[s1_5:], s2[s2_5:])

    <class 'int'>
    avan nthi


## Test program

    word = 'Python'
    first=word[0]
    rest=word[1:]
    result=rest + "-" + first +"y"
    print (result)

    ython-Py


# Level 3 - Conditionals


## Booleans can only be true or false. Used predominantly with conditionals.

