+++
title = "Code School - free weekend - Fly with python"
type = "post"
date = "2018-04-07"
tags = [ "python", "programming" ]
topics = [ "" ]
+++

-   Note taken on <span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">[2017-08-20 Sun 15:48] </span></span>   
    Completed this course today.


# Level 1 - Lists and Dictionaries <span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">&lt;2017-08-19 Sat&gt;</span></span>

- asdasdas
- 
- hello
- Dictionaries : basically used to lookup values using a key instead
    of an index. It maps keys to values. These are separated by a
    colon.
-   Dictionaries can hold anything in terms of the value type, eg strings to string, strings to numbers and etc etc.
-   Dictionaries are enclosed within Curly {} brackets, and lists are enclosed within square brackets [].
-   To check whether a word is in the dictionary, use the get()
-   There is no append function for the dictionary. THis works only on lists, or pehaps lists within dictionaries !
-   Test program for key:value pair demonstration
    -   Note taken on <span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">[2017-08-19 Sat 20:13] </span></span>
    -   'None' - is a special type which basically represents the absence of
        any value. 'True' is returned if the key exists.
    -   [ ] using get() is best practise because it will not crash the program. Need to understand this statement better

    slang = {'testing':'gre', 'champagne':'sparkler', 'ontario':'canada'}
    print(slang.get('toronto'))
    print(slang.get('canada')) #note that this is none. Shows that the dictionary only searches for the first term or the key. The second terms is called value.
    print(slang.get('ontario'))

    None
    None
    canada

-   Test program for updating dictionary items
    -   Note taken on <span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">[2017-08-19 Sat 20:30] </span></span>   
        The square brackets are used to represent each key value inside the
        dictionary.

    performances = {'Ventriloquism':'9:00am', 
                    'Snake Charmer': '12:00pm', 
                    'Amazing Acrobatics': '2:00pm', 
                    'Enchanted Elephants':'5:00pm'}
    print (performances)
    
    #changing a key's value
    performances['Enchanted Elephants']='6:00pm'
    print (performances)
    
    #Deleteing an item
    del performances['Enchanted Elephants']
    print (performances)

    {'Ventriloquism': '9:00am', 'Snake Charmer': '12:00pm', 'Amazing Acrobatics': '2:00pm', 'Enchanted Elephants': '5:00pm'}
    {'Ventriloquism': '9:00am', 'Snake Charmer': '12:00pm', 'Amazing Acrobatics': '2:00pm', 'Enchanted Elephants': '6:00pm'}
    {'Ventriloquism': '9:00am', 'Snake Charmer': '12:00pm', 'Amazing Acrobatics': '2:00pm'}

-   Comparing lists : They need to have the same values in the same order. Even if the values are the same, but the order is different, the list is deemed different.

    list_a = ['python', 'bison', 'lion']
    list_b = ['python', 'lion', 'bison']
    
    print(list_a == list_b)

    False

-   Works a little different for dictionaries: Dictionaries are not ordered lists. They are just key:value pairs. Therefore in a comparison, only the key value pairs need to be equal.
-   List of lists:it is possible to have a list of multiple lists. Sometimes called 2D lists.

    breakfast = ['omelette', 'noodles', 'soy milk']
    lunch= ['upma', 'rice', 'roti and sabji', 'curd']
    dinner= ['curd rice', 'bakhri and sabji', 'adai']
    food_items = [breakfast, lunch, dinner]
    print (food_items[0])
    print (food_items[2])
    #also possible to get a specific item within this list, by using the 2D list concept. The 2nd list ordering also starts from 0.
    print (food_items[0][2])

    ['omelette', 'noodles', 'soy milk']
    ['curd rice', 'bakhri and sabji', 'adai']
    soy milk

-   Dictionary of lists - makes it easier to define
-   Test program 1 : example for defining multiple lists and a dictionary of lists
    
        breakfast = ['omelette', 'noodles', 'soy milk']
        lunch= ['upma', 'rice', 'roti and sabji', 'curd']
        dinner= ['curd rice', 'bakhri and sabji', 'adai']
        food_items = {'bf':breakfast,'dins': dinner}
        print ('Breakfast is \n\t',food_items['bf'])

    Breakfast is 
         ['omelette', 'noodles', 'soy milk's

-   Test program 2 - extracting a particular value from dictionaries / nested lists

    # So instead of having separate lists ...
    weekdays = ['Bearded Lady', 'Tiniest Man', 'Ventriloquist Vinnie']
    saturday = ['Amazing Acrobatics', 'Enchanted Elephants']
    sunday   = ['Snake Charmer', 'Amazing Acrobatics']
    
    # We could have one big list ...
    performances = [['Bearded Lady', 'Tiniest Man', 'Ventriloquist Vinnie'],
                    ['Amazing Acrobatics', 'Enchanted Elephants'],
                    ['Snake Charmer', 'Amazing Acrobatics']]
    
    #to get one particular value, ventriloquist,  the code would be :
    print (performances[0][2])

    Ventriloquist Vinnie

    performances = {'weekdays': ['Bearded Lady', 'Tiniest Man', 'Ventriloquist Vinnie'],
                    'saturday': ['Amazing Acrobatics', 'Enchanted Elephants'],
                    'sunday':   ['Snake Charmer', 'Amazing Acrobatics']}
    
    #to get Ventriloquist Vinnie performance
    print (performances['weekdays'][2])

    Ventriloquist Vinnie


# Level 2 - Loops  <span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">&lt;2017-08-20 Sun&gt;</span></span>


## For loop can be used to sum up the numbers within a list. len() can be used to compute the average.

    lista= [1,4,5,2.45]  #list of numbers
    sum = 0 #initialising the variable
    for x in lista:   #x is a temporary arbitrary variable, just to represent the items while looping.
        sum = sum + x
    
    print ('the sum is',sum)
    average = sum/len(lista)
    print ('the average is',average)    

    the sum is 12.45
    the average is 3.1125


## Generating a random number !


### random.random() : picks a random number between 0.0 - 1.0


### random.choice([1,2,3]): picks a random number from the provided list. This could also be used on multiple lists, by just referencing the variable where the multiple lists are stored. Refer [Test program - printing random choice from a list of strings](#org2e54ab9)


### random.randint(a,b): provides a random integer between a and b.

    import random
    
    r1 = random.random()
    print (r1)
    r2 = random.choice ([1,4,5,67])
    print (r2)
    
    r4= random.randint (1,56)
    print (r4)

    0.8639718856206364
    1
    16


## For fixing the number of iterations, when there is no list or reference, we use the function range().

-   Note taken on <span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">[2017-08-20 Sun 07:39] </span></span>   
    notice how the range values are from 0-9. When we use range(10), an
    internal list for a count is taken by python. However, the total count is 10 times.

    import random
    for i in range(10):  #notice how the range taken is from 0-9. 
        print (i,'\t')
        print ('The number is ',random.randint(1,500),'\n')

    0   
    The number is  28 
    
    1   
    The number is  78 
    
    2   
    The number is  88 
    
    3   
    The number is  35 
    
    4   
    The number is  183 
    
    5   
    The number is  161 
    
    6   
    The number is  131 
    
    7   
    The number is  256 
    
    8   
    The number is  113 
    
    9   
    The number is  255 


## range() can have an alternative format wherein range(start,stop,step). In this way, we control the values of i itself, including control the number of times it is repeated and the values that will be taken at each repeat.

    for i in range(200,250,5): #notice how start value is included in the output, but the stop value is excluded.
        print (i)

    200
    205
    210
    215
    220
    225
    230
    235
    240
    245


## Test program - printing letters of a word

    word = 'Welcome!'
    for i in range(len(word)):
        print (word[i],'\n')
    for i in word: #shorter and cleaner method than above.
        print (i,'\n')

    W 
    
    e 
    
    l 
    
    c 
    
    o 
    
    m 
    
    e 
    
    ! 
    
    W 
    
    e 
    
    l 
    
    c 
    
    o 
    
    m 
    
    e 
    
    ! 


<a id="org2e54ab9"></a>

## Test program - printing random choice from a list of strings

    import random
    fortunes = ['You will have very good luck today.',
                'A secret admirer will soon show how they feel.',
                "The more you give, the more you'll have.",
                'Hard work pays off.',
                "Don't give up."]
    fortune=random.choice(fortunes)
    print (fortune)

    Hard work pays off.


## Test program, looping within a list and appending to each item and creating a new list

    l1 = ['idly', 'vada', 'sambhar']
    menu=[]
    for i in l1:
        menu.append(i + '- spam')
    print (menu)

    ['idly- spam', 'vada- spam', 'sambhar- spam']


## To get the list of keys in a dictionary : dict\_name.keys() and for the values dict\_name.values()


## removing the space separation while using print command with multiple values

    print ('name is','donkey','kang',sep='-') #sep has to be placed after the variables which are to be separated.

    name is-donkey-kang


## Possible to format output on the fly within the print command.

-   example format(price,'.2f') - price formated to 2 decimal places, as a float.


## for loops loop for a certain number of times, while loops work till a condition is fulfilled.


## Possible to run a while loop forever, and include a conditional break condition inside.

    menu= ['idly', 'vada', 'sambhar']
    order=[]
    while order !='q':
        order = input('State your order from the items (q to quit)')
        if menu.get(order)=='none':
            print ('Item does not exist')
        else:
            print ("Order on it's way")
        order = input ('Anything else? (q to quit)')


## Continue statement within the while loop : breaks the loop but then goes back to loop starting.


# Level 3 Functions <span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">&lt;2017-08-20 Sun&gt;</span></span>


## Function name, input data to the function and output data to the function

    def lotto_number():
        print ('nutcase')
    lotto_number()

    nutcase


## Test program -

    import random
    
    def lotto_numbers():
        # code in the function goes here
        lotto_nums=[]
        for i in range(5):
            lotto_nums.append(random.randint(1, 53))
        print(lotto_nums)
    
    lotto_numbers()

    [40, 49, 48, 23, 52]


## The concept of 'main' - best practise.

-   once the function is defined, it is called using a set of variables which the function needs to perform and get the answers.
-   Therefore, these initial set of values or statements are called 'main'
-   therefore, often these initial set is included in a function called main()
-   Then only main() is called and it is not necessary to call all the variables.
-   This is a best practise in python.


## A variable defined within the function is accessible only inside the function. Variables outside the function are global and can be accessed anywhere. Functions have global scope.

    def five():
        num = 5
        num = num + 1
    
    def main():
        num = 1
        five()
        print(num)
    
    main()

    1


# Level 4 - Reading and writing from files <span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">&lt;2017-08-20 Sun&gt;</span></span>


## open a file needs the open function, file name and the mode


## 'r' - read, 'w' - write, 'a' - append.


## write mode will always over-write the existing contents of the file.


## need to use a for loop to store the lines inside a file after reading it. The strip() can be used for stripping leading and trailing whitespaces.

    fn = open('/home/shrysr/temp/schedule.txt','r')
    rl=[]
    for lines in fn:
        line=lines.strip()
        rl.append(line)
    print (rl)
    
    fn.close()

    ['Ventriloquism-10:00am', 'Snake Charmer-12:00pm', 'Amazing Acrobatics-2:00pm', 'Enchanted Elephants-5:00pm']


## Possible to add parameters in the line.split() to store the split into two variables at the specified character, like .split(' - ' ).

-   Note taken on <span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">[2017-08-20 Sun 11:20] </span></span>   
    Note that the charac in the .split(charac) parameter has to exactly
    match the string or line being passed, otherwise this will return an error.

    l1 = 'this is a nut-case in point is'
    (s1,s2)=l1.split( '-')
    print (s1)
    print (s2)


## Python has over 60+ types of exceptions.


## Using try and except


### it is possible to try out a set of instructions and then store the exceptions that crop up.


### The exceptions that are stored in python also have specific names. It is possible to use an exception to check for that particular name and store it in a variable.

    try:
        schedule_file = open('schedule.txt', 'r')
    
    except FileNotFoundError as err:
        print (err)

    [Errno 2] No such file or directory: 'schedule.txt'


## test

    guess = int(input('Guess a number between 1 and 10:'))


# Level 5- Modules


## Modules are code libraries that contain functions, that can be called to be used in our code.


## pip is a package manager to install modules.


## JSON format looks very similar to a list of dictionaries !

-   Note taken on <span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">[2017-08-20 Sun 11:41] </span></span>   
    basically like dictionary items contained within a list.


## test program importing from code school as JSON

    import requests as rq
    
    mrq=rq.get('http://go.codeschool.com/spamvanmenu')
    ml=mrq.json()
    print (ml)

    [{'price': '3.00', 'name': 'Omelet', 'desc': 'Yummy'}, {'price': '5.75', 'name': 'Burrito', 'desc': 'Breakfast Burrito'}, {'price': '4.50', 'name': 'Waffles', 'desc': 'Belgian waffles with syrup'}]


## Test program

    import requests
      
    url = "http://api.openweathermap.org/data/2.5/weather?q=Orlando,fl&units=imperial&appid=2de143494c0b295cca9337e1e96b00e0"
    request = requests.get(url)
    
    weather_json = request.json()
    
    print (weather_json)
    weather_main = weather_json['main']


## A script containing definitions is a module and can be imported by other scripts or modules.

