+++
title = "An SSD can breathe life into old computers"
type = ""
date = "2018-07-10"
tags = [ "Emacs", "productivity", "Mac", "Linux" ]
topics = [ "" ]
+++

It's a well known trick that installing a [SSD](https://www.storagereview.com/ssd_vs_hdd) in place of the
conventional Hard disk can breathe new life into very old machines. My
mid 2010 Macbook Pro is one such example, being over 8 years old.

In particular, within Emacs - `mu4e` responds much more quickly and there is
significantly less lag in searching / accessing emails and `HTML` rendering.

The other advantage of using a Mac over Linux is that installation and
setup instructions are more often available out the box for the Mac OS
(though this is changing). I have access to dedicated apps including
Evernote, Dash, Spotify, Whatsap, Slack etc on my Mac. This is in
addition to several other high quality apps on the App store.

I do love using Arch Linux and Antergos and the packing management and
rolling OS upgrades are totally cool. However, a little bit of
elegance in the user interface and hardware (being available out of
the box) does ease up the mind and progress. It takes quite a bit of
effort to achieve that unless you are at the level of purely using
[Emacs as window manager](http://www.howardism.org/Technical/Emacs/new-window-manager.html).

On the Mac, it is easy to move around virtual desktops and use the
magic track pad to rapidly switch between applications as well. I'm
sure many of these 'gimmicks' may be setup with diligence and due time
on Linux through solutions with varying levels of quality.

However, as of today : it's likely I would have struggled with some
aspects on Linux that are readily available on other systems. Evernote
is an example. After hours of searching for an alternate (and
acceptable) solution for software packages that are not yet ported to
Linux, I would quite possibly end up making a compromise. Typically,
the compromises would mean using Electron or Web based versions of
apps, which are often not as powerful as the desktop app, not to
mention inconvenient. A prime example would be Evernote, on Arch
Linux. Some other examples are apps like Word, Pages, Outlook and Excel and
so on, which are more critical. 

Ultimately, my preference would be to use a Mac as my daily driver and
play around with Linux on a back up computer. In any case, multiple
Linux distros can be run on [Virtual Box](https://www.virtualbox.org/) within the Mac. 

