+++
title = "Course notes: Introduction to R , DataQuest"
type = "post"
date = "2018-04-14"
tags = [ "R", "DataQuest", "R-101" ]
topics = [ "" ]
draft = true
+++


# Numeric types are both whole numbers & decimal numbers


# Vector Attributes:

-   Vectors have an additional feature that can store the names of every value. This feature is called an attribute.
-   Attributes are labeled values that can be attached to a vector. To access an attribute, use `names()` function on the vector


# Comparison operators

-   these don't limit you to comparing single values against single values.
-   useful to compare a single value against an entire vector.


# `names()`

-   can be used to index the values in a vector by name. This name can then be called out to extract or search for a particular index. Once indexed, subsequent results, from comparisons and other operations, will tend to show the names and the corresponding values for each name.


# Logical indexing

This will check each value of your target vector, against the corresponding value in the logical vector. If the corresponding value is TRUE, then the resulting slice will contain that value. If the corresponding value is FALSE, the resulting slice will not contain that value.

    class_names <- c("math", "chemistry", "writing", "art", "history", "music", "physical_education")
    final_scores <- c(88, 87.66667, 86, 91.33333, 84, 91, 89.33333)
    names(final_scores) <- class_names
    
    lowest_score <- min(final_scores)
    lowest_logical <- lowest_score == final_scores
    lowest_logical  
    # this is a vector storing a boolean value of whether the index or item is the lowest score. 
    # Therefore, it has a boolean for all the values in the said vector. 
    
    lowest_class <- final_scores[lowest_logical]
    # Using logical indexing, to store only the TRUE values, and discard the FALSE values. 
    # In this case, history has the lowest score, and there is only a single value that is true. 
    
    lowest_class


# Recycling rule in `R`:

-   When we perform an arithmetic operation on two vectors that have different lengths, the `R` interpreter will also reuse the values of the shorter vector.
-   This recycling behavior is called the recycling rule. The recycling rule states that when performing an operation between two vectors of unequal length, the `R` interpreter will automatically recycle the shorter one, until it's long enough to match the longer one.


# `matrix()` :

-   is a collection of values of the same data type arranged in a two-dimensional rectangular shape.

-   To create a matrix: matrix() function.

    matrix(data = NA ,nrow = 1,ncol = 1,byrow = FALSE).

data: This is the data that will be transformed into a matrix. This data must be in vector form. This is why you combined vectors in the earlier screen.

nrow: This is the number of rows you want your matrix to hold.

ncol: This is the number of columns you want your matrix to hold.

byrow: This is a logical value of either TRUE or FALSE. If TRUE, the matrix will be filled by rows. If false, by columns. We'll dive deeper into how this argument works, later in this mission.


# A vector & matrix:

-   can only store one data type. When you used names() to name your vector, you are accessing something called an attribute, which is not considered a value in the object. If you tried to create a vector or matrix containing multiple data types, the R interpreter will not return an error. Instead, the R interpreter will attempt to guess the correct data type and then convert all your data to that data type.


# Adding labels to the matrix rows and columns

-   aids readibility.
-   use the `colnames()` and `rownames()`


# When adding a new column to a matrix, length of vector must match number of rows. This can be used as a condition for matching the quality of new data being added as well.


# Dimensions of a matrix `dim()`

-   can be used to find the dimensions of a matrix. `dim()` returns the rows and columns. An index [] can be used to access a particular item, i.e row or column.


# Adding a column to an existing matrix

-   `cbind()` and `rbind()` for adding rows to a matrix.
-   General syntax format is `cbind(<matrix name>, <column vector>)`.


# Extracting values from a matrix:

A matrix can be indexed and a particular value can be extracted by using the typical indexing format, `<matrix>[rowname, colname]`. 

If there are headings prescribed to the rows and columns, these can be used to zero into a particular value directly.

It is also possible to extract a particular row or column from a matrix. 


# `sort()` can be used to sort the values in a matrix. Syntax: sort(<matrix name>[desired index], decreasing = FALSE).

-   Note taken on <span class="timestamp-wrapper"><span class="timestamp">[2018-02-28 Wed 09:49] </span></span>   
    Decreasing in the sort function is FALSE by default.


## Figure out how the header values of each column can be included in the display of the result.


# `head()` | `tail()`

these commands can be used to extract the first or last values in each vector. 

Syntax : head(x, n). Using head() on a dataset also enables viewing the headers and the first 6 rows of a dataset by default. Therefore it can be used to preview a data set.

x: is the vector or matrix you're using.

n: is the number of elements you want to display. 


# To store multiple data types:

-   a vector or matrix would not work.
-   Instead, a dataframe can store multiple data type values.
-   A dataframe is a two-dimensional data structure, similar to a matrix, that can hold multiple data types.


# `read.csv()`

-   used to read in a csv file and store the same as a dataframe. The boundaries for each value is defined by the comma.


# `str()`

-   to reveal the internal structure of the dataframe, which enhances our understanding of the data.

-   Revealing the internal structure will provide the data types, the number of observations, variables/columns and a preview of the values in each column.


# Factors

-   are used to represent categorical data like Major\_category. Since these are categorical, they have a limited range of values. The number of unique categories are called levels. Whenever you're dealing with factor variables, each value will belong to one of the levels. The `factor()` is used to convert a character variable into a factor.


# When we convert a vector, or any object into a factor variable, the `R` interpreter will automatically use these values to create levels


# List

-   A list is a one-dimensional data structure that can hold multiple types of R objects.
-   A list behaves similar to a dataframe, i.e. it can hold multiple types of data. A list can also hold vectors, matrices, dataframes, all in one structure.
-   General good practice: to store dataframes within lists. It is not good practice to store objects in dataframes.
-   Adding a value to a list is similar to adding a value to a vector. It is also possible to create a list of lists.

